[Doc] Add documentions for layout (#900)
taichi-dev/taichi: docs/layout.rst

.. _layout:

Tensor layout
=============

Tensors (:ref:`scalar_tensor`) can be *placed* in a specific shape and *layout*.
Having a good layout can be the key to performance.

> In Taichi, placing a layout is treated in a recursive manner.

Reviewer: "layout is defined in a recursive manner."

For example, this declares a 0-D tensor:

.. code-block:: python

    x = ti.var(ti.f32)
    ti.root.place(x)
    # or
    x = ti.var(ti.f32, shape=())

This declares a 1-D tensor of size ``3``:

.. code-block:: python

    x = ti.var(ti.f32)
    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).place(x)
    # or
    x = ti.var(ti.f32, shape=3)

This declares a 1-D tensor of shape ``(3, 4)``:

.. code-block:: python

    x = ti.var(ti.f32)
    ti.root.dense(ti.ij, (3, 4)).place(x)
    # or
    x = ti.var(ti.f32, shape=(3, 4))

Now, you may say, why not just simply specify ``shape=`` argument to specify tensor shape? Why we need these fancy stuffs like ``ti.root`` and ``place``? Wasn't them the same?
Good question, let go forward and figure out why.

> Multi-dimentional layout

Reviewer: After reading this section, I don't see how it answers the question of "why we need `ti.root` or `ti.place`" in the previous section. Instead, it only talks about row versus column major storage.

I'd suggest that we add an example like the one in [Taichi paper Section 3.2](http://taichi.graphics/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/taichi_lang.pdf)?

------------------------

> As we all know, most mordern computers have a 1-D memory model.

Reviewer: """
Let's start with the simplest layout.

Since address space are linear in most modern architectures, for 1D Taichi tensors, the address of ``i``-ith element is simply ``i``.
"""

So it's not a big deal to store 1-D tensors, the address of ``i``-th can simply be ``base + i``.

> To store a multi-D tensor, however, it has to be reshaped into 1-D, to fit into the 1-D address space.

Reviewer: "flattened, in order to fit into the 1-D address space."

For example, to store a 2-D tensor of size ``(3, 2)``, there are two way to do this:

    1. The address of ``(i, j)``-th is ``base + i * 2 + j``.
    1. The address of ``(i, j)``-th is ``base + j * 3 + i``.

To specify which layout to use in Taichi:

.. code-block:: python

    ti.root.dense(ti.ij, (3, 2)).place(x)    # 1 (default)

>     ti.root.dense(ti.ji, (2, 3)).place(y)    # 2

Reviewer: I have to admit that I missed `ji` in the first pass. Can we do something to highlight that `j` comes before `i`? Add some comment after `# 2`?

Author: I found that `ti.ji` doesn't exist in taichi, so it's replaced by a correct one :)

> They can be accessed in the same manner: ``x[i, j]`` and ``y[i, j]``.

Reviewer: Logically speaking, both `x` and `y` have the same shape of `(3, 2)`, and they can be accessed ..., where `0 <= i < 3 && 0 <= j < 2`?

However, they have a very different memory layout:

.. code-block::
    #     address low ..................... address high
    # x:  x[0,0]  x[0,1]  x[0,2]  x[1,0]  x[1,1]  x[1,2]
    # y:  y[0,0]  y[1,0]  y[0,1]  y[1,1]  y[0,2]  y[1,2]

> See? ``x`` first increases the first index, while ``y`` first increases the second index. When overflow, reset to zero and begin to increase the second index.

Reviewer: This is row-major versus column-major storage, can we mention this somewhere?

.. note::

    For those people from C/C++:

    .. code-block:: c

        int x[3][2];  // 1
        int y[2][3];  // 2

        for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
            for (int j = 0; j < 2; j++) {
                do_something ( x[i][j] );
                do_something ( y[j][i] );
            }
        }

Place together
--------------

Tensors of same size can be placed together.

For example, this places two 1-D tensor of size ``3``:

.. code-block:: python

    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).place(x, y)

Their memory layout:

.. code-block::

    #  address low ......... address high
    #  x[0]  y[0]  x[1]  y[1]  x[2]  y[2]

In contrast, this places two tensor placed seperately:

.. code-block:: python

    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).place(x)
    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).place(y)

Now, their memory layout:

.. code-block::

    #  address low ......... address high
    #  x[0]  x[1]  x[2]  y[0]  y[1]  y[2]

Impact on performance
---------------------

> The difference in layout is usually ignored by ordinal users.

Reviewer: "Normally, you don't have to worry about the performance nuances between different layouts, and should just define the simplest layout as a start."

> However, locality sometimes have significant impact on performance especially when your tensor is huge.

Reviewer: New line?

> However, locality sometimes have significant impact on performance especially when your tensor is huge.

Reviewer: "... have a significant impact on the performance, especially when the tensor size is huge."

It's better to place two often-used-together elements as close as possible.

Let's take a simple 1-D wave equation solver as example:

.. code-block:: python

    N = 200000
    pos = ti.var(ti.f32)
    vel = ti.var(ti.f32)
    ti.root.dense(ti.i, N).place(pos)
    ti.root.dense(ti.i, N).place(vel)

    @ti.kernel
    def step():
        pos[i] += vel[i] * dt
        vel[i] += -k * pos[i] * dt

Here, we placed ``pos`` and ``vel`` seperately. So the distance in address space between ``pos[i]`` and ``vel[i]`` is ``200000``. This will break locality and cause a huge overhead of cache-miss, which damages performance.

> A better placement is to place them together:

Reviewer: "This will result in a poor spatial locality and lots of cache-misses, which damages the performance."

.. _layout:

Tensor layout
=============

Tensors (:ref:`scalar_tensor`) can be *placed* in a specific shape and *layout*.
Defining a proper layout can be critical to the performance, although in most cases, you probably don't have to worry about it.
In Taichi, layout is defined in a recursive manner. See :ref:`snode` for more details about how this works.

For example, this declares a 0-D tensor:

.. code-block:: python

    x = ti.var(ti.f32)
    ti.root.place(x)
    # or
    x = ti.var(ti.f32, shape=())

This declares a 1D tensor of size ``3``:

.. code-block:: python

    x = ti.var(ti.f32)
    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).place(x)
    # or
    x = ti.var(ti.f32, shape=3)

This declares a 2D tensor of shape ``(3, 4)``:

.. code-block:: python

    x = ti.var(ti.f32)
    ti.root.dense(ti.ij, (3, 4)).place(x)
    # or
    x = ti.var(ti.f32, shape=(3, 4))

> You may wondering, why not just simply specify the tensor ``shape``? Why we need these fancy stuffs like ``ti.root`` and ``place``? Aren't they doing the same?

Reviewer 2: wondering -> wonder
the same -> the same thing

Good question, let go forward and figure out why.

Row-major versus column-major
-----------------------------

Let's start with the simplest layout.

Since address space are linear in most modern architectures, for 1D Taichi tensors, the address of ``i``-th element is simply ``i``.

> To store a multi-dimentional tensor, however, it has to be flattened, in order to fit into the 1D address space.

Reviewer 2: `dimentional` -> `dimensional`

For example, to store a 2D tensor of size ``(3, 2)``, there are two way to do this:

    1. The address of ``(i, j)``-th is ``base + i * 2 + j`` (row-major).

    2. The address of ``(i, j)``-th is ``base + j * 3 + i`` (column-major).

To specify which layout to use in Taichi:

.. code-block:: python

    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).dense(ti.j, 2).place(x)    # row-major (default)
    ti.root.dense(ti.j, 2).dense(ti.i, 3).place(y)    # column-major

> Logically speaking, both ``x`` and ``y`` have the same shape of ``(3, 2)``, and they can be accessed in the same manner, where ``0 <= i < 3 && 0 <= j < 2``.

Reviewer 2: Let's remove `logically speaking`. I don't know what it means in English TBH...

They can be accessed in the same manner: ``x[i, j]`` and ``y[i, j]``.

> However, they have a very different memory layout:

Reviewer 2: a very different memory layout -> very different memory layouts

.. code-block::

    #     address low ........................... address high
    # x:  x[0,0]   x[0,1]   x[0,2] | x[1,0]   x[1,1]   x[1,2]
    # y:  y[0,0]   y[1,0] | y[0,1]   y[1,1] | y[0,2]   y[1,2]

See? ``x`` first increases the first index, while ``y`` first increases the second index. When overflow, reset to zero and begin to increase the second index.
This is row-major versus column-major storage.

.. note::

    For those people from C/C++, here's what they looks like:

    .. code-block:: c

        int x[3][2];  // row-major
        int y[2][3];  // column-major

        for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
            for (int j = 0; j < 2; j++) {
                do_something ( x[i][j] );
                do_something ( y[j][i] );
            }
        }

AoS versus SoA
--------------

Tensors of same size can be placed together.

> For example, this places two 1D tensor of size ``3`` (array of structure, AoS):

Reviewer 2: tensor->tensors

.. code-block:: python

    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).place(x, y)

Their memory layout:

.. code-block::

    #  address low ............. address high
    #  x[0]   y[0] | x[1]  y[1] | x[2]   y[2]

> In contrast, this places two tensor placed seperately (structure of array, SoA):

Reviewer 2: seperately -> separately

.. code-block:: python

    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).place(x)
    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).place(y)

Now, their memory layout:

.. code-block::

    #  address low ............. address high
    #  x[0]  x[1]   x[2] | y[0]   y[1]   y[2]

Normally, you don't have to worry about the performance nuances between different layouts, and should just define the simplest layout as a start.
However, locality sometimes have a significant impact on the performance, especially when the tensor is huge.

> **It's better to place two frequently-related elements as close as possible.**

Author: “两个经常一起访问的元素”，any suggestions?

Reviewer 2: How about "To improve spatial locality of memory accesses (i.e. cache hit rate / cacheline utilization), it's sometimes helpful to minimize the address differences of elements that are accessed together."

.. code-block:: python

  for i, j in A:
    A[i, j] += 1

will iterate over elements of ``A`` following row-major order. If ``A`` is column-major, then the iteration follows the column-major order.

If ``A`` is blocked, the iteration will happen within each block first. This maximizes memory bandwidth utilization in most cases.

Struct-fors on sparse tensors follows the same philosophy, and will be discussed further in :ref:`sparse`.

Examples
--------

2D matrix, row-major

.. code-block:: python

  A = ti.var(ti.f32)
  ti.root.dense(ti.ij, (256, 256)).place(A)

2D matrix, column-major

.. code-block:: python

  A = ti.var(ti.f32)
  ti.root.dense(ti.ji, (256, 256)).place(A) # Note ti.ji instead of ti.ij

`8x8` blocked 2D array of size `1024x1024`

.. code-block:: python

  density = ti.var(ti.f32)
  ti.root.dense(ti.ij, (128, 128)).dense(ti.ij, (8, 8)).place(density)

3D Particle positions and velocities, arrays-of-structures

.. code-block:: python

  pos = ti.Vector(3, dt=ti.f32)
  vel = ti.Vector(3, dt=ti.f32)
  ti.root.dense(ti.i, 1024).place(pos, vel)
  # equivalent to
  ti.root.dense(ti.i, 1024).place(pos(0), pos(1), pos(2), vel(0), vel(1), vel(2))

> 3D Particle positions and velocities, structures-of-arrays

Author: ```suggestion
3D Particle positions and velocities, SoA
```

.. _layout:

Advanced dense layouts
======================

Tensors (:ref:`scalar_tensor`) can be *placed* in a specific shape and *layout*.
Defining a proper layout can be critical to performance, especially for memory-bound applications. A carefully designed data layout can significantly improve cache/TLB-hit rates and cacheline utilization. Although in most cases, you probably don't have to worry about it.

> In Taichi, the layout is defined in a recursive manner. See :ref:`snode` for more details about how this works. We suggested starting with the default layout specification (simply by specifying ``shape`` when creating tensors using ``ti.var/Vector/Matrix``),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Taichi, the layout is defined in a recursive manner. See :ref:`snode` for more details about how this works. We suggest starting with the default layout specification (simply by specifying ``shape`` when creating tensors using ``ti.var/Vector/Matrix``),
```

> and then migrate to more advanced layouts using the ``ti.root.X`` syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and then migrate to more advanced layouts using the ``ti.root.X`` syntax if necessary.
```

From ``shape`` to ``ti.root.X``
-------------------------------

For example, this declares a 0-D tensor:

.. code-block:: python

    x = ti.var(ti.f32)
    ti.root.place(x)
    # is equivalent to:
    x = ti.var(ti.f32, shape=())

This declares a 1D tensor of size ``3``:

.. code-block:: python

    x = ti.var(ti.f32)
    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).place(x)
    # is equivalent to:
    x = ti.var(ti.f32, shape=3)

This declares a 2D tensor of shape ``(3, 4)``:

.. code-block:: python

    x = ti.var(ti.f32)
    ti.root.dense(ti.ij, (3, 4)).place(x)
    # is equivalent to:
    x = ti.var(ti.f32, shape=(3, 4))

You may wonder, why not just simply specify the tensor ``shape``? Why we need these fancy stuffs like ``ti.root`` and ``place``? Aren't they doing the same thing?
Good question, let go forward and figure out why.

Row-major versus column-major
-----------------------------

Let's start with the simplest layout.

> Since address space are linear in most modern architectures, for 1D Taichi tensors, the address of ``i``-th element is simply ``i``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since address spaces are linear in modern computers, for 1D Taichi tensors, the address of the ``i``-th element is simply ``i``.
```

To store a multi-dimensional tensor, however, it has to be flattened, in order to fit into the 1D address space.

> For example, to store a 2D tensor of size ``(3, 2)``, there are two way to do this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, to store a 2D tensor of size ``(3, 2)``, there are two ways to do this:
```

    1. The address of ``(i, j)``-th is ``base + i * 2 + j`` (row-major).

    2. The address of ``(i, j)``-th is ``base + j * 3 + i`` (column-major).

To specify which layout to use in Taichi:

.. code-block:: python

    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).dense(ti.j, 2).place(x)    # row-major (default)
    ti.root.dense(ti.j, 2).dense(ti.i, 3).place(y)    # column-major

Both ``x`` and ``y`` have the same shape of ``(3, 2)``, and they can be accessed in the same manner, where ``0 <= i < 3 && 0 <= j < 2``. They can be accessed in the same manner: ``x[i, j]`` and ``y[i, j]``.
However, they have a very different memory layouts:

.. code-block::

    #     address low ........................... address high
    # x:  x[0,0]   x[0,1]   x[0,2] | x[1,0]   x[1,1]   x[1,2]
    # y:  y[0,0]   y[1,0] | y[0,1]   y[1,1] | y[0,2]   y[1,2]

> See? ``x`` first increases the first index, while ``y`` first increases the second index. When overflow, reset to zero and begin to increase the second index.

Reviewer: Isn't this the opposite..? `x` first increases along its second axis/index `j`?

> See? ``x`` first increases the first index, while ``y`` first increases the second index. When overflow, reset to zero and begin to increase the second index.

Reviewer: WDYT if we write this like "`x` first increases along the `i` axis (or index), while `y` .." to be more explicit?

> This is row-major versus column-major storage.

Reviewer: I think we can remove this, because the title has already explained it.

.. note::

    For those people from C/C++, here's what they looks like:

    .. code-block:: c

        int x[3][2];  // row-major
        int y[2][3];  // column-major

        for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
            for (int j = 0; j < 2; j++) {
                do_something ( x[i][j] );
                do_something ( y[j][i] );
            }
        }

> AoS versus SoA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Array of Structures (AoS), Structure of Arrays (SoA)
```

Reviewer: Sorry I remember i suggested this. Note that when using acronyms, it's always good to write out the full terminology on the first encounter.

--------------

Tensors of same size can be placed together.

For example, this places two 1D tensors of size ``3`` (array of structure, AoS):

.. code-block:: python

    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).place(x, y)

Their memory layout:

.. code-block::

    #  address low ............. address high
    #  x[0]   y[0] | x[1]  y[1] | x[2]   y[2]

In contrast, this places two tensor placed separately (structure of array, SoA):

.. code-block:: python

    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).place(x)
    ti.root.dense(ti.i, 3).place(y)

Now, their memory layout:

.. code-block::

    #  address low ............. address high
    #  x[0]  x[1]   x[2] | y[0]   y[1]   y[2]

Normally, you don't have to worry about the performance nuances between different layouts, and should just define the simplest layout as a start.
However, locality sometimes have a significant impact on the performance, especially when the tensor is huge.

> **To improve spatial locality of memory accesses (i.e. cache hit rate / cacheline utilization), it's sometimes helpful to minimize the address differences of elements that are accessed together.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**To improve spatial locality of memory accesses (i.e. cache hit rate / cacheline utilization), it's sometimes helpful to place the data elements within relatively close storage locations if they are often accessed together.**
```

Take a simple 1D wave equation solver for example:

.. code-block:: python

    N = 200000
    pos = ti.var(ti.f32)
    vel = ti.var(ti.f32)
    ti.root.dense(ti.i, N).place(pos)
    ti.root.dense(ti.i, N).place(vel)

    @ti.kernel
    def step():
        pos[i] += vel[i] * dt
        vel[i] += -k * pos[i] * dt

Here, we placed ``pos`` and ``vel`` seperately. So the distance in address space between ``pos[i]`` and ``vel[i]`` is ``200000``. This will result in a poor spatial locality and lots of cache-misses, which damages the performance.
A better placement is to place them together:

.. code-block:: python

    ti.root.dense(ti.i, N).place(pos, vel)

> Then ``vel[i]`` is placed right next to ``pos[i]``, this can increases the cache-hit rate and therefore increases performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then ``vel[i]`` is placed right next to ``pos[i]``, this can increase the cache-hit rate and therefore increase performance.
```

> Flat layouts versus blocked layouts 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flat layouts versus hierarchical layouts 
```

-------------------------

> By default, when allocating a ``ti.var`` , it follows the most naive data layout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, when allocating a ``ti.var`` , it follows the simplest data layout.
```

.. code-block:: python

  val = ti.var(ti.f32, shape=(32, 64, 128))
  # C++ equivalent: float val[32][64][128]

> However, oftentimes this data layout is suboptimal for computer graphics tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, at times this data layout is suboptimal for computer graphics tasks.
```

For example, ``val[i, j, k]`` and ``val[i + 1, j, k]`` are very far away (``32 KB``) from each other, and leads to poor access locality under certain computation tasks. Specifically, in tasks such as texture trilinear interpolation, the two elements are not even within the same ``4KB`` pages, creating a huge cache/TLB pressure.

A better layout might be

.. code-block:: python

  val = ti.var(ti.f32)
  ti.root.dense(ti.ijk, (8, 16, 32)).dense(ti.ijk, (4, 4, 4)).place(val)

> This organizes ``val`` in ``4x4x4`` blocks, so that with high probability ``val[i, j, k]`` and its neighbours are close to each other (i.e., in the same cacheline or memory page).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This organizes ``val`` in ``4x4x4`` blocks, so that with high probability ``val[i, j, k]`` and its neighbours are close to each other (i.e., in the same memoy page or even cacheline).
```

Author: Refuse, typo `memoy` -> `memory`.

Reviewer: My point is that memory should come before cacheline

Struct-fors on advanced dense data layouts
------------------------------------------

Struct-fors on nested dense data structures will automatically follow their data order in memory. For example, if 2D scalar tensor ``A`` is stored in row-major order,

.. code-block:: python

  for i, j in A:
    A[i, j] += 1

> will iterate over elements of ``A`` following row-major order. If ``A`` is column-major, then the iteration follows the column-major order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the above code snippet will iterate over elements of ``A`` following row-major order. If ``A`` is column-major, then the iteration follows the column-major order.
```

Author: Refuse, this will make the col-major ignored. We want to emph that taichi can take care of the raw/col-major switch.

Reviewer: TBH you could simply say "Same for column-major order."

> If ``A`` is blocked, the iteration will happen within each block first. This maximizes memory bandwidth utilization in most cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If ``A`` is hierarchical, the iteration will happen level by level. This maximizes memory bandwidth utilization in most cases.
```

Author: `level by level` -> `happen within each level first`?

> Struct-fors on sparse tensors follows the same philosophy, and will be discussed further in :ref:`sparse`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Struct-for loops on sparse tensors follow the same philosophy, and will be discussed further in :ref:`sparse`.
```

Examples
--------

2D matrix, row-major

.. code-block:: python

  A = ti.var(ti.f32)
  ti.root.dense(ti.ij, (256, 256)).place(A)

2D matrix, column-major

.. code-block:: python

  A = ti.var(ti.f32)
  ti.root.dense(ti.ji, (256, 256)).place(A) # Note ti.ji instead of ti.ij

`8x8` blocked 2D array of size `1024x1024`

.. code-block:: python

  density = ti.var(ti.f32)
  ti.root.dense(ti.ij, (128, 128)).dense(ti.ij, (8, 8)).place(density)

> 3D Particle positions and velocities, arrays-of-structures

Reviewer: I think you can just write AoS and SoA now.

Author: I see, fyi it's written by @yuanming-hu, in the old data_layout.rst.
```suggestion
3D Particle positions and velocities, AoS
```

======================

Tensors (:ref:`scalar_tensor`) can be *placed* in a specific shape and *layout*.

> Defining a proper layout can be critical to performance, especially for memory-bound applications. A carefully designed data layout can significantly improve cache/TLB-hit rates and cacheline utilization. Although in most cases, you probably don't have to worry about it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Defining a proper layout can be critical to performance, especially for memory-bound applications. A carefully designed data layout can significantly improve cache/TLB-hit rates and cacheline utilization. Of course, if you don't care about performance, then you probably don't have to worry about advanced data layouts.
```

Author: Let's use `most cases`, since **performance is not all about data layouts**, also feel this a bit impolite to those newcomers with adv_layout, wdyt?

Reviewer 2: `most cases` sounds a little vague to me. How about `When performance is not the first priority`?

> In Taichi, layout is defined in a recursive manner. See :ref:`snode` for more details about how this works. We suggested starting with the default layout specification (simply by specifying ``shape`` when creating tensors using ``ti.var/Vector/Matrix``),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Taichi, the layout is defined in a recursive manner. See :ref:`snode` for more details about how this works. We suggested starting with the default layout specification (simply by specifying ``shape`` when creating tensors using ``ti.var/Vector/Matrix``),
```

    x = ti.var(ti.f32)
    ti.root.dense(ti.ij, (3, 4)).place(x)
    # is equivalent to:
    x = ti.var(ti.f32, shape=(3, 4))

> You may wonder, why not just simply specify the tensor ``shape``? Why we need these fancy stuffs like ``ti.root`` and ``place``? Aren't they doing the same thing?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may wonder, why not simply specify the ``shape`` of the tensor? Why bother using the more complex version?
```

Then ``vel[i]`` is placed right next to ``pos[i]``, this can increases the cache-hit rate and therefore increases performance.

> Linear versus local block

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Flat layouts versus blocked layouts 
```
